Days after Pakistani prime minister Imran Khan visited Saudi Arabia, National Security Advisor Ajit Doval met with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman to counter Pakistan's version on Kashmir.

The one-on-one meeting between the two leaders lasted for about two hours, sources told India Today TV.

Sources also added that while a wide range of bilateral issues were discussed, the status of Jammu and Kashmir was also part of the discussion.

The Saudi Crown Prince, on his part, expressed understanding about India's approach and actions in Jammu and Kashmir.

The visit is expected to further strengthen the ties between India and Saudi Arabia. "The objective is to help identify specific areas of cooperation at a time when Saudi Arabia is looking to diversify its economy in line with MBS' vision 2030," said sources.

NSA Ajit Doval also held meetings with his Saudi counterpart Musaad bin Mohammed Al Aiban. They discussed issues of national and regional security, highlighting the importance of close security ties.

Doval is expected to interact with top leaders of the UAE today.

India counter Imran's rhetoric

The meeting between NSA Doval and Mohammad Bin Salman comes a fortnight after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan met the Saudi Crown Prince in Jeddah and apprised him of the situation in Kashmir.

According to the ruling Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party's official Twitter account, Khan "highlighted the tyranny of the Indian government" in Kashmir following New Delhi's decision revoke Jammu and Kashmir's special status on August 5.

Imran Khan has been in regular contact with the crown prince over telephone over the Kashmir issue. Riyadh also sent Adel bin Ahmed Al-Jubeir, the minister of state for foreign affairs to Islamabad earlier this month to calm down the tense situation between India and Pakistan.

Tensions between India and Pakistan escalated after New Delhi revoked Jammu and Kashmir's special status. Reacting to India's move on Kashmir, Pakistan downgraded diplomatic ties with New Delhi and expelled the Indian High Commissioner.

Pakistan has been trying to internationalise the Kashmir issue but India told the international community that the abrogation of Article 370 was its "internal matter". New Delhi has also made it clear that the Kashmir issue is a bilateral matter and there is no scope for third party intervention.

New Delhi has also asked Islamabad to accept reality and stop its anti-India rhetoric.